The game begins.
In turn, starting with the dealer, players turn over the top card of their Deck and place
it face up on their Discard pile. Cards must be turned towards the other players, as
shown in the following examples. Play progresses in a clockwise direction.
Players may only use one hand to turn over their cards. The other hand should never
be used, although it may be placed upon their Deck.
Not like that!
Like this!
Duel
When two people reveal cards with the same design on them (regardless of colour)
there is a Duel.
The first of the two players to grab the Totem wins the Duel. The other players must
not intervene.
The losing player must pick up both the Discards in front of their opponent and of
themselves, as well as any cards in the Pot. They place these cards face down
under their Deck.
The game then resumes starting with the loser of the Duel. 
Sometimes when a special card has been turned over (see below), a Duel can
involve several players. As before, the player who grabs the Totem first wins the
Duel.
If there are several losers then each collects their own Discards and the winner
divides their Discards and the Pot between the losers however they wish.
Duels can be triggered at any time if there are two cards with the same design
visible.
Take great care! Some cards seem identical but are actually slightly different.
BOX XXX XXX
Winning a Duel is a test of speed, not a trial of strength!
When there is a dispute over who was first to grab the Totem there is no point in the
players trying to pull it towards themselves like monkeys. The winner is the player
with the most fingers in contact with the Totem, and in case of a tie, it is the player
whose hand is lowest on the Totem. Should the Totem be accidentally knocked off
the table the Duel is cancelled and the game continues.
XXX XXX END BOX
BOX XXX XXX
Mistakes
The Totem is sacred. Mistakes must be punished. A player who grabs the Totem in
error must very humbly take the Discards of all the other players along with any
cards in the Pot. Should a player knock over or drop the totem they must pay the
same penalty.

XXX XXX END BOX
Special Cards:
Special cards do not cause Duels but do change the play of the game
Arrows pointing inwards: Olala
All players must try to grab the Totem.
Whoever succeeds places their Discards in the Pot and then restarts play.
Coloured arrows: Ayayay
As soon as this card appears it is the colours and not the designs that trigger Duels,
so it is quite possible that a Duel will start immediately.
The effects of this card end (i.e. Duels are once again caused by the designs) when
one of these three events occurs: the Totem falls, a Duel is triggered or another
special card is turned over.
Arrows pointing outwards: Wopopop
All players simultaneously turn over the top card of their Deck.
If any of the designs are identical, a Duel is triggered immediately.
If no Duel is triggered then the player who revealed this card continues play and
turns over another card.
Note: To be sure that everyone turns their card over simultaneously someone can 
count "one, two, three".
BOX XXX XXX
Special Cases
If an "Arrows pointing outwards" card causes:
• another "Arrows pointing outwards” card to be revealed this card has the usual
effect unless a Duel is triggered at the same time;
• an "Arrows pointing inwards" card to be revealed and a Duel takes place at the
same time then the player who grabs the Totem first decides which outcome occurs:
the Duel (if that player was involved) or the special card;
• several Duels to occur at the same time then the player who grabs the Totem first
wins their Duel and the other Duels are cancelled.
XXX XXX END BOX
Endgame
 When a player turns over their last card the other players carry on as normal. The
player cannot win until they get rid of their Discards by winning a Duel in which they
are involved. As soon as this happens they are declared the winner and appointed
lord of the tribe and the great Supreme Guru to the wild adulation of the crowds!
Optional Rule: Play may continue in order to determine the relative importance of the
players within the tribe.
Special Cases
If the last card played is "Arrows pointing inwards" and the player does not get the
Totem then the player must collect everybody’s Discards and put them into their
Deck (instead of the winner of the Duel placing their Discards in the Pot). The game
then continues with the player who hoped they might be about to win muttering
ancient Abouloubou curses;
if the last card played is "Coloured Arrows" then the card has no effect, the player
must collect all their Discards and the game continues;
if the last card played is "Arrows pointing outwards" the player wins.
Variant for three players
The "Coloured Arrows" cards are removed from the game
However if the cards on the top of the three Discard piles are ever the same colour
then the players must act as if the "Coloured Arrows" card had been revealed.
Variant for two players
Players play two separate hands. The two hands of each of the players are
considered to be independent with each hand having its own Deck!
The “Coloured Arrows” cards are removed from the game and the remaining cards
are divided into 4 equal Decks. 
Players play one after another, alternating between their two hands. The sequence
is:
• Right hand of Player 1;
• Right hand of Player 2;
• Left hand of Player 1;
• Left hand of Player 2.
and so on ...
If a Duel is triggered, it is only the hands involved that can grab the Totem and it is
only the cards from the hands involved that are collected afterwards.
If a Duel is triggered between the two hands of a player that player must NOT grab
the Totem.
If the card "Arrows pointing inwards" appears it is best to use the hand with the
largest Discard pile to grab the totem. Of course this is easier said than done.
The game ends when either:
both players have got rid of one of their Decks
or
one player has got rid of both of their two Decks.
The players then count their remaining cards and whoever has the least left wins.
All other rules remain unchanged.
Variant for one player
Find some bongos, gather a tribe and teach them the rules!
BOX XXX XXX
If you purchased any of the expansion sets for Jungle Speed and you wish to
rediscover the peace and serenity of your early games then you can sort the different
sets using the symbols in the corners of the cards.
Symbol of the cards from the base game
BOX XXX XXX