Monopoly Board and Game Pieces
 
When you open the Monopoly box, you'll find the following:

One Monopoly board
Two dice
12 game tokens
32 houses and 12 hotels
16 Chance cards and 16 Community Chest cards
A title deed card for each property
Play money (aka Monopoly money). Since 2008, the standard U.S. edition includes a total of $20,580 divided into $500, $100, $50, $20, $10, $5 and $1 bills that are color-coded for convenience.
There are 40 squares on the standard Monopoly board, although technically there are 41 possible squares upon which to land, since the "Jail" square is divided into two sections. There are 22 property squares named for streets in or around Atlantic City. There are four railroad squares named for the early 20th century railroad lines, and two utility companies, the Electric Company and Water Works. That makes 28 total squares that can be purchased.


 
In addition, there are three Community Chest squares and three Chance squares that require players to draw a card. Both Chance and Community Chest cards can be good or bad. There is the famous "Get out of Jail Free" card, but there's also the "Go directly to jail. Do not pass GO. Do not collect $200" card. The two most potentially disastrous cards are those requiring "street repairs" and "general repairs" for all houses or hotels you own. The "street repairs" card requires the player that draws it to pay the bank $40 per house and $115 per hotel, which is a tough blow to folks who have invested heavily to improve their properties. The "general repairs" card isn't much better, charging $25 per house and $100 per hotel. Other unfortunate squares include Luxury Tax (which carries a $100 penalty) and Income Tax ($200 or 10 percent of your net worth).

The four remaining squares are the corner squares. GO is where play begins. Every time you land on or pass GO on subsequent turns, you collect $200, referred to as your "salary" in Monopoly. Free Parking is the only space in the game that requires you to do absolutely nothing. The "Go to Jail" square only results in jail time if you land on it, not if you pass it. The Jail square has two sections: "Just Visiting" is if you roll and land on Jail; and "In Jail" is when you get sent to jail.

Monopoly Rules
 
All of the following Monopoly rules come from the official game instructions that have accompanied standard U.S. Monopoly sets since 2008. If they differ from the way your family plays, that's perfectly fine, since Monopoly has always fostered a rich culture of "house rules."

The object of Monopoly is become the wealthiest player by buying, selling, trading and collecting rent on properties. Depending on how long you want to play, you can either play until all but one player has gone bankrupt or set a time limit and crown the richest player the champion.


 
To start the game, each player chooses a token and one player is selected as the banker. The banker distributes $1,500 in Monopoly money to all players: two $500s, $100s and $50s; six $20s; five each of $10s, $5s and $1s.

The highest roll of the dice goes first. Start in the GO square and move clockwise around the board according to the number on the dice. If you land on an available property, you can buy it by paying the banker the price listed on the title. The advantage of owning property is that opponents have to pay you rent when they land on your square. If you buy all of the properties in the same color group, then you have a monopoly, allowing you to charge double the listed rent. Once you have a monopoly, you can start to build houses and eventually a hotel, raising the rent further. Of course, you have to pay rent whenever you land on an opponent's property.

If you land on an available property, but decline to buy it, then the banker can auction the property to the highest bidder. The banker starts the bidding at any price and all players can participate, including the banker and the player who originally declined the property.

You can get sent to jail three ways, by landing on the square marked "Go to Jail," by picking a "Go to Jail" card or by throwing three doubles in a row. You can also get out of jail three ways: using the "Get out of Jail Free" card, rolling doubles on one of three consecutive turns or paying your way out with $50. If you don't roll doubles after three turns, you have to pay $50 to get out of jail. While in jail, you can still buy or sell properties, build houses and hotels and collect rent.

Trading and private sales of properties between players is not only legal, but highly encouraged. The only thing that players cannot do is give private loans. Only the banker can mortgage a property. The fixed interest rate for "lifting" a mortgage is 10 percent of the price on the title.

A player goes bankrupt when he or she doesn't have enough cash or assets to pay the bank or another player. Players can sell houses and hotels back to the bank for half of their original value -- but if that doesn't provide enough cash, the bankrupt player forfeits all properties to the bank or an opponent and is out of the game.
